---
title: "friendly feudalism"
date: 2022-08-16T06:22:40-06:00
---

{{< raw >}}
<a href="/pdf/friendly-feudalism.pdf"  download>
pdf
</a>
<br>
<br>
{{</ raw >}}

# Friendly Feudalism: The Tibet Myth (2007)

---

**Michael Parenti** 2007-01  
**Original publication:**
[michaelparenti.org](http://www.michaelparenti.org/Tibet.html)  
Updated and expanded version from January 2007.

---

## Contents

- [For Lords and Lamas](#for-lords-and-lamas)
- [Secularization vs. Spirituality](##secularization-vs-spirituality)
- [Exit Feudal Theocracy](#exit-feudal-theocracy)
- [References](#references)

## For Lords and Lamas

Along with the blood drenched landscape of religious conflict there is
the experience of inner peace and solace that every religion promises,
none more so than Buddhism. Standing in marked contrast to the
intolerant savagery of other religions, Buddhism is neither fanatical
nor dogmatic --- so say its adherents. For many of them Buddhism is less
a theology and more a meditative and investigative discipline intended
to promote an inner harmony and enlightenment while directing us to a
path of right living. Generally, the spiritual focus is not only on
oneself but on the welfare of others. One tries to put aside egoistic
pursuits and gain a deeper understanding of one's connection to all
people and things. "Socially engaged Buddhism" tries to blend individual
liberation with responsible social action in order to build an
enlightened society.

A glance at history, however, reveals that not all the many and widely
varying forms of Buddhism have been free of doctrinal fanaticism, nor
free of the violent and exploitative pursuits so characteristic of other
religions. In Sri Lanka there is a legendary and almost sacred recorded
history about the triumphant battles waged by Buddhist kings of yore.
During the twentieth century, Buddhists clashed violently with each
other and with non-Buddhists in Thailand, Burma, Korea, Japan, India,
and elsewhere. In Sri Lanka, armed battles between Buddhist Sinhalese
and Hindu Tamils have taken many lives on both sides. In 1998 the U.S.
State Department listed thirty of the world's most violent and dangerous
extremist groups. Over half of them were religious, specifically Muslim,
Jewish, and Buddhist.[^1]  

In South Korea, in 1998, thousands of monks of the Chogye Buddhist order
fought each other with fists, rocks, fire-bombs, and clubs, in pitched
battles that went on for weeks. They were vying for control of the
order, the largest in South Korea, with its annual budget of \$9.2
million, its millions of dollars worth of property, and the privilege of
appointing 1,700 monks to various offices. The brawls damaged the main
Buddhist sanctuaries and left dozens of monks injured, some seriously.
The Korean public appeared to disdain both factions, feeling that no
matter what side took control, "it would use worshippers' donations for
luxurious houses and expensive cars."[^2]

As with any religion, squabbles between or within Buddhist sects are
often fueled by the material corruption and personal deficiencies of the
leadership. For example, in Nagano, Japan, at Zenkoji, the prestigious
complex of temples that has hosted Buddhist sects for more than 1,400
years, "a nasty battle" arose between Komatsu the chief priest and the
Tacchu, a group of temples nominally under the chief priest's sway. The
Tacchu monks accused Komatsu of selling writings and drawings under the
temple's name for his own gain. They also were appalled by the frequency
with which he was seen in the company of women. Komatsu in turn sought
to isolate and punish monks who were critical of his leadership. The
conflict lasted some five years and made it into the
courts.[^3]

But what of *Tibetan* Buddhism? Is it not an exception to this sort of
strife? And what of the society it helped to create? Many Buddhists
maintain that, before the Chinese crackdown in 1959, old Tibet was a
spiritually oriented kingdom free from the egotistical lifestyles, empty
materialism, and corrupting vices that beset modern industrialized
society. Western news media, travel books, novels, and Hollywood films
have portrayed the Tibetan theocracy as a veritable Shangri-La. The
Dalai Lama himself stated that "the pervasive influence of Buddhism" in
Tibet, "amid the wide open spaces of an unspoiled environment resulted
in a society dedicated to peace and harmony. We enjoyed freedom and
contentment."[^4]

A reading of Tibet's history suggests a somewhat different picture.
"Religious conflict was commonplace in old Tibet," writes one western
Buddhist practitioner. "History belies the Shangri-La image of Tibetan
lamas and their followers living together in mutual tolerance and
nonviolent goodwill. Indeed, the situation was quite different. Old
Tibet was much more like Europe during the religious wars of the
Counterreformation."[^5] In the thirteenth century,
Emperor Kublai Khan created the first Grand Lama, who was to preside
over all the other lamas as might a pope over his bishops. Several
centuries later, the Emperor of China sent an army into Tibet to support
the Grand Lama, an ambitious 25-year-old man, who then gave himself the
title of Dalai (Ocean) Lama, ruler of all Tibet.

His two previous lama "incarnations" were then retroactively recognized
as his predecessors, thereby transforming the 1st Dalai Lama into the
3rd Dalai Lama. This 1st (or 3rd) Dalai Lama seized monasteries that did
not belong to his sect, and is believed to have destroyed Buddhist
writings that conflicted with his claim to divinity. The Dalai Lama who
succeeded him pursued a sybaritic life, enjoying many mistresses,
partying with friends, and acting in other ways deemed unfitting for an
incarnate deity. For these transgressions he was murdered by his
priests. Within 170 years, despite their recognized divine status, five
Dalai Lamas were killed by their high priests or other
courtiers.[^6]

For hundreds of years competing Tibetan Buddhist sects engaged in
bitterly violent clashes and summary executions. In 1660, the 5th Dalai
Lama was faced with a rebellion in Tsang province, the stronghold of the
rival Kagyu sect with its high lama known as the Karmapa. The 5th Dalai
Lama called for harsh retribution against the rebels, directing the
Mongol army to obliterate the male and female lines, and the offspring
too "like eggs smashed against rocks... In short, annihilate any traces
of them, even their names." (Curren, p. 50)

In 1792, many Kagyu monasteries were confiscated and their monks were
forcibly converted to the Gelug sect (the Dalai Lama's denomination).
The Gelug school, known also as the "Yellow Hats," showed little
tolerance or willingness to mix their teachings with other Buddhist
sects. In the words of one of their traditional prayers:

> Praise to you, violent god of the Yellow Hat teachings\
> who reduces to particles of dust\
> great beings, high officials and ordinary people\
> who pollute and corrupt the Gelug doctrine.[^7]

An eighteenth-century memoir of a Tibetan general depicts sectarian
strife among Buddhists that is as brutal and bloody as any religious
conflict might be.[^8] This grim history remains
largely unvisited by present-day followers of Tibetan Buddhism in the
West.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Religions have had a close relationship not only with violence but with
economic exploitation. Indeed, it is often the economic exploitation
that necessitates the violence. Such was the case with the Tibetan
theocracy. Until 1959, when the Dalai Lama last presided over Tibet,
most of the arable land was still organized into manorial estates worked
by serfs. These estates were owned by two social groups: the rich
secular landlords and the rich theocratic lamas. Even a writer
sympathetic to the old order allows that "a great deal of real estate
belonged to the monasteries, and most of them amassed great riches."
Much of the wealth was accumulated "through active participation in
trade, commerce, and money lending." (Karan, p. 64)

Drepung monastery was one of the biggest landowners in the world, with
its 185 manors, 25,000 serfs, 300 great pastures, and 16,000 herdsmen.
The wealth of the monasteries rested in the hands of small numbers of
high-ranking lamas. Most ordinary monks lived modestly and had no direct
access to great wealth. The Dalai Lama himself "lived richly in the
1000-room, 14-story Potala Palace."[^9]

Secular leaders also did well. A notable example was the
commander-in-chief of the Tibetan army, a member of the Dalai Lama's lay
Cabinet, who owned 4,000 square kilometers of land and 3,500 serfs.
(Gelders, p. 62, p. 174) Old Tibet has been misrepresented by some
Western admirers as "a nation that required no police force because its
people voluntarily observed the laws of karma." (Reported skeptically in
Lopez, p. 9) In fact it had a professional army, albeit a small one,
that served mainly as a gendarmerie for the landlords to keep order,
protect their property, and hunt down runaway serfs.

Young Tibetan boys were regularly taken from their peasant families and
brought into the monasteries to be trained as monks. Once there, they
were bonded for life. Tashì-Tsering, a monk, reports that it was common
for peasant children to be sexually mistreated in the monasteries. He
himself was a victim of repeated rape, beginning at age
nine.[^10] The monastic estates also
conscripted children for lifelong servitude as domestics, dance
performers, and soldiers.

In old Tibet there were small numbers of farmers who subsisted as a kind
of free peasantry, and perhaps an additional 10,000 people who composed
the "middle-class" families of merchants, shopkeepers, and small
traders. Thousands of others were beggars. There also were slaves,
usually domestic servants, who owned nothing. Their offspring were born
into slavery. (Gelders, p. 110) The majority of the rural population
were serfs. Treated little better than slaves, the serfs went without
schooling or medical care. They were under a lifetime bond to work the
lord's land --- or the monastery's land --- without pay, to repair the
lord's houses, transport his crops, and collect his firewood. They were
also expected to provide carrying animals and transportation on demand.
(Goldstein 1989, p. 5) Their masters told them what crops to grow and
what animals to raise. They could not get married without the consent of
their lord or lama. And they might easily be separated from their
families should their owners lease them out to work in a distant
location. (Strong, p. 15, pp. 19-21, p. 24)

As in a free labor system and unlike slavery, the overlords had no
responsibility for the serf's maintenance and no direct interest in his
or her survival as an expensive piece of property. The serfs had to
support themselves. Yet as in a slave system, they were bound to their
masters, guaranteeing a fixed and permanent workforce that could neither
organize nor strike nor freely depart as might laborers in a market
context. The overlords had the best of both worlds.

One 22-year old woman, herself a runaway serf, reports: "Pretty serf
girls were usually taken by the owner as house servants and used as he
wished"; they "were just slaves without rights." (Strong, p. 25) Serfs
needed permission to go anywhere. Landowners had legal authority to
capture those who tried to flee. One 24-year old runaway welcomed the
Chinese intervention as a "liberation." He testified that under serfdom
he was subjected to incessant toil, hunger, and cold. After his third
failed escape, he was merciless beaten by the landlord's men until blood
poured from his nose and mouth. They then poured alcohol and caustic
soda on his wounds to increase the pain, he claimed. (Strong, p. 31)

The serfs were taxed upon getting married, taxed for the birth of each
child and for every death in the family. They were taxed for planting a
tree in their yard and for keeping animals. They were taxed for
religious festivals and for public dancing and drumming, for being sent
to prison and upon being released. Those who could not find work were
taxed for being unemployed, and if they traveled to another village in
search of work, they paid a passage tax. When people could not pay, the
monasteries lent them money at 20 to 50 percent interest. Some debts
were handed down from father to son to grandson. Debtors who could not
meet their obligations risked being cast into slavery. (Gelders,
pp. 175-176; Strong, pp. 25-26)

The theocracy's religious teachings buttressed its class order. The poor
and afflicted were taught that they had brought their troubles upon
themselves because of their wicked ways in previous lives. Hence they
had to accept the misery of their present existence as a karmic
atonement and in anticipation that their lot would improve in their next
lifetime. The rich and powerful treated their good fortune as a reward
for, and tangible evidence of, virtue in past and present lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Tibetan serfs were something more than superstitious victims, blind
to their own oppression. As we have seen, some ran away; others openly
resisted, sometimes suffering dire consequences. In feudal Tibet,
torture and mutilation --- including eye gouging, the pulling out of
tongues, hamstringing, and amputation --- were favored punishments
inflicted upon thieves, and runaway or resistant serfs. Journeying
through Tibet in the 1960s, Stuart and Roma Gelder interviewed a former
serf, Tsereh Wang Tuei, who had stolen two sheep belonging to a
monastery. For this he had both his eyes gouged out and his hand
mutilated beyond use. He explains that he no longer is a Buddhist: "When
a holy lama told them to blind me I thought there was no good in
religion." (Gelders, p. 113) Since it was against Buddhist teachings to
take human life, some offenders were severely lashed and then "left to
God" in the freezing night to die. "The parallels between Tibet and
medieval Europe are striking," concludes Tom Grunfeld in his book on
Tibet. (Grunfeld, p. 9, pp. 7-33; Greene, pp. 241-249; Goldstein 1989,
pp. 3-5; Lopez, N/A)

In 1959, Anna Louise Strong visited an exhibition of torture equipment
that had been used by the Tibetan overlords. There were handcuffs of all
sizes, including small ones for children, and instruments for cutting
off noses and ears, gouging out eyes, breaking off hands, and
hamstringing legs. There were hot brands, whips, and special implements
for disemboweling. The exhibition presented photographs and testimonies
of victims who had been blinded or crippled or suffered amputations for
thievery. There was the shepherd whose master owed him a reimbursement
in yuan and wheat but refused to pay. So he took one of the master's
cows; for this he had his hands severed. Another herdsman, who opposed
having his wife taken from him by his lord, had his hands broken off.
There were pictures of Communist activists with noses and upper lips cut
off, and a woman who was raped and then had her nose sliced away.
(Strong, pp. 91-96)

Earlier visitors to Tibet commented on the theocratic despotism. In
1895, an Englishman, Dr. A. L. Waddell, wrote that the populace was
under the "intolerable tyranny of monks" and the devil superstitions
they had fashioned to terrorize the people. In 1904 Perceval Landon
described the Dalai Lama's rule as "an engine of oppression." At about
that time, another English traveler, Captain W. F. T. O'Connor, observed
that "the great landowners and the priests... exercise each in their own
dominion a despotic power from which there is no appeal," while the
people are "oppressed by the most monstrous growth of monasticism and
priest-craft." Tibetan rulers "invented degrading legends and stimulated
a spirit of superstition" among the common people. In 1937, another
visitor, Spencer Chapman, wrote, "The Lamaist monk does not spend his
time in ministering to the people or educating them. \[...\] The beggar
beside the road is nothing to the monk. Knowledge is the jealously
guarded prerogative of the monasteries and is used to increase their
influence and wealth." (Gelders, pp. 123-125) As much as we might wish
otherwise, feudal theocratic Tibet was a far cry from the romanticized
Shangri-La so enthusiastically nurtured by Buddhism's western
proselytes.

## Secularization vs. Spirituality

What happened to Tibet after the Chinese Communists moved into the
country in 1951? The treaty of that year provided for ostensible
self-governance under the Dalai Lama's rule but gave China military
control and exclusive right to conduct foreign relations. The Chinese
were also granted a direct role in internal administration "to promote
social reforms." Among the earliest changes they wrought was to reduce
usurious interest rates, and build a few hospitals and roads. At first,
they moved slowly, relying mostly on persuasion in an attempt to effect
reconstruction. No aristocratic or monastic property was confiscated,
and feudal lords continued to reign over their hereditarily bound
peasants. "Contrary to popular belief in the West," claims one observer,
the Chinese "took care to show respect for Tibetan culture and
religion." (Goldstein 1995, p. 52)

Over the centuries the Tibetan lords and lamas had seen Chinese come and
go, and had enjoyed good relations with Generalissimo Chiang Kaishek and
his reactionary Kuomintang rule in China. (Harrer, p. 29) The approval
of the Kuomintang government was needed to validate the choice of the
Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama. When the current 14th Dalai Lama was first
installed in Lhasa, it was with an armed escort of Chinese troops and an
attending Chinese minister, in accordance with centuries-old tradition.
What upset the Tibetan lords and lamas in the early 1950s was that these
latest Chinese were *Communists*. It would be only a matter of time,
they feared, before the Communists started imposing their collectivist
egalitarian schemes upon Tibet.

The issue was joined in 1956-57, when armed Tibetan bands ambushed
convoys of the Chinese Peoples Liberation Army. The uprising received
extensive assistance from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),
including military training, support camps in Nepal, and numerous
airlifts.[^11] [^12] Meanwhile in the
United States, the American Society for a Free Asia, a CIA-financed
front, energetically publicized the cause of Tibetan resistance, with
the Dalai Lama's eldest brother, Thubtan Norbu, playing an active role
in that organization. The Dalai Lama's second-eldest brother, Gyalo
Thondup, established an intelligence operation with the CIA as early as
1951. He later upgraded it into a CIA-trained guerrilla unit whose
recruits parachuted back into Tibet.[^13]

Many Tibetan commandos and agents whom the CIA dropped into the country
were chiefs of aristocratic clans or the sons of chiefs. Ninety percent
of them were never heard from again, according to a report from the CIA
itself, meaning they were most likely captured and
killed.[^12] "Many lamas and lay members of the elite and
much of the Tibetan army joined the uprising, but in the main the
populace did not, assuring its failure," writes Hugh
Deane.[^14] In their book on Tibet, Ginsburg and Mathos
reach a similar conclusion: "As far as can be ascertained, the great
bulk of the common people of Lhasa and of the adjoining countryside
failed to join in the fighting against the Chinese both when it first
began and as it progressed."[^15] Eventually the
resistance crumbled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Whatever wrongs and new oppressions introduced by the Chinese after
1959, they did abolish slavery and the Tibetan serfdom system of unpaid
labor. They eliminated the many crushing taxes, started work projects,
and greatly reduced unemployment and beggary. They established secular
schools, thereby breaking the educational monopoly of the monasteries.
And they constructed running water and electrical systems in Lhasa.
(Greene, p. 248; Grunfeld, N/A)

Heinrich Harrer (later revealed to have been a sergeant in Hitler's SS)
wrote a bestseller about his experiences in Tibet that was made into a
popular Hollywood movie. He reported that the Tibetans who resisted the
Chinese "were predominantly nobles, semi-nobles and lamas; they were
punished by being made to perform the lowliest tasks, such as laboring
on roads and bridges. They were further humiliated by being made to
clean up the city before the tourists arrived." They also had to live in
a camp originally reserved for beggars and vagrants --- all of which
Harrer treats as sure evidence of the dreadful nature of the Chinese
occupation. (Harrer, p. 54)

By 1961, Chinese occupation authorities expropriated the landed estates
owned by lords and lamas. They distributed many thousands of acres to
tenant farmers and landless peasants, reorganizing them into hundreds of
communes. Herds once owned by nobility were turned over to collectives
of poor shepherds. Improvements were made in the breeding of livestock,
and new varieties of vegetables and new strains of wheat and barley were
introduced, along with irrigation improvements, all of which reportedly
led to an increase in agrarian production. (Karan, pp. 36-38, p. 41,
pp. 57-58)[^16]

Many peasants remained as religious as ever, giving alms to the clergy.
But monks who had been conscripted as children into the religious orders
were now free to renounce the monastic life, and thousands did,
especially the younger ones. The remaining clergy lived on modest
government stipends and extra income earned by officiating at prayer
services, weddings, and funerals. (Gelders, N/A)

Both the Dalai Lama and his advisor and youngest brother, Tendzin
Choegyal, claimed that "more than 1.2 million Tibetans are dead as a
result of the Chinese occupation."[^17] The official
1953 census --- six years before the Chinese crackdown --- recorded the
entire population residing in Tibet at 1,274,000. (Karan, pp. 52-53)
Other census counts put the population within Tibet at about two
million. If the Chinese killed 1.2 million in the early 1960s then
almost all of Tibet, would have been depopulated, transformed into a
killing field dotted with death camps and mass graves --- of which we
have no evidence. The thinly distributed Chinese force in Tibet could
not have rounded up, hunted down, and exterminated that many people even
if it had spent all its time doing nothing else.

Chinese authorities claim to have put an end to floggings, mutilations,
and amputations as a form of criminal punishment. They themselves,
however, have been charged with acts of brutality by exile Tibetans. The
authorities do admit to "mistakes," particularly during the 1966-76
Cultural Revolution when the persecution of religious beliefs reached a
high tide in both China and Tibet. After the uprising in the late 1950s,
thousands of Tibetans were incarcerated. During the Great Leap Forward,
forced collectivization and grain farming were imposed on the Tibetan
peasantry, sometimes with disastrous effect on production. In the late
1970s, China began relaxing controls "and tried to undo some of the
damage wrought during the previous two
decades."[^18]

In 1980, the Chinese government initiated reforms reportedly designed to
grant Tibet a greater degree of self-rule and self-administration.
Tibetans would now be allowed to cultivate private plots, sell their
harvest surpluses, decide for themselves what crops to grow, and keep
yaks and sheep. Communication with the outside world was again
permitted, and frontier controls were eased to permit some Tibetans to
visit exiled relatives in India and Nepal. (Goldstein 1995, pp. 47-48)
By the 1980s many of the principal lamas had begun to shuttle back and
forth between China and the exile communities abroad, "restoring their
monasteries in Tibet and helping to revitalize Buddhism there." (Curren,
p. 8)

As of 2007 Tibetan Buddhism was still practiced widely and tolerated by
officialdom. Religious pilgrimages and other standard forms of worship
were allowed but within limits. All monks and nuns had to sign a loyalty
pledge that they would not use their religious position to foment
secession or dissent. And displaying photos of the Dalai Lama was
declared illegal.[^19]

In the 1990s, the Han, the ethnic group comprising over 95 percent of
China's immense population, began moving in substantial numbers into
Tibet. On the streets of Lhasa and Shigatse, signs of Han colonization
are readily visible. Chinese run the factories and many of the shops and
vending stalls. Tall office buildings and large shopping centers have
been built with funds that might have been better spent on water
treatment plants and housing. Chinese cadres in Tibet too often view
their Tibetan neighbors as backward and lazy, in need of economic
development and "patriotic education." During the 1990s Tibetan
government employees suspected of harboring nationalist sympathies were
purged from office, and campaigns were once again launched to discredit
the Dalai Lama. Individual Tibetans reportedly were subjected to arrest,
imprisonment, and forced labor for carrying out separatist activities
and engaging in "political subversion." Some were held in administrative
detention without adequate food, water, and blankets, subjected to
threats, beatings, and other mistreatment.[^20]

Tibetan history, culture, and certainly religion are slighted in
schools. Teaching materials, though translated into Tibetan, focus
mainly on Chinese history and culture. Chinese family planning
regulations allow a three-child limit for Tibetan families. (There is
only a one-child limit for Han families throughout China, and a
two-child limit for rural Han families whose first child is a girl.) If
a Tibetan couple goes over the three-child limit, the excess children
can be denied subsidized daycare, health care, housing, and education.
These penalties have been enforced irregularly and vary by
district.[^20] None of these child services, it should be
noted, were available to Tibetans before the Chinese takeover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the rich lamas and secular lords, the Communist intervention was an
unmitigated calamity. Most of them fled abroad, as did the Dalai Lama
himself, who was assisted in his flight by the CIA. Some discovered to
their horror that they would have to work for a living. Many, however,
escaped that fate. Throughout the 1960s, the Tibetan exile community was
secretly pocketing \$1.7 million a year from the CIA, according to
documents released by the State Department in 1998. Once this fact was
publicized, the Dalai Lama's organization itself issued a statement
admitting that it had received millions of dollars from the CIA during
the 1960s to send armed squads of exiles into Tibet to undermine the
Maoist revolution. The Dalai Lama's annual payment from the CIA was
\$186,000. Indian intelligence also financed both him and other Tibetan
exiles. He has refused to say whether he or his brothers worked for the
CIA. The agency has also declined to comment.[^21]

In 1995, the *News & Observer of Raleigh*, North Carolina, carried a
frontpage color photograph of the Dalai Lama being embraced by the
reactionary Republican senator Jesse Helms, under the headline "Buddhist
Captivates Hero of Religious Right." (Lopez, p. 3) In April 1999, along
with Margaret Thatcher, Pope John Paul II, and the first George Bush,
the Dalai Lama called upon the British government to release Augusto
Pinochet, the former fascist dictator of Chile and a longtime CIA client
who was visiting England. The Dalai Lama urged that Pinochet not be
forced to go to Spain where he was wanted to stand trial for crimes
against humanity.

Into the twenty-first century, via the National Endowment for Democracy
and other conduits that are more respectable sounding than the CIA, the
U.S. Congress continued to allocate an annual \$2 million to Tibetans in
India, with additional millions for "democracy activities" within the
Tibetan exile community. In addition to these funds, the Dalai Lama
received money from financier George Soros.[^22]

Whatever the Dalai Lama's associations with the CIA and various
reactionaries, he did speak often of peace, love, and nonviolence. He
himself really cannot be blamed for the abuses of Tibet's ancien régime,
having been but 25 years old when he fled into exile. In a 1994
interview, he went on record as favoring the building of schools and
roads in his country. He said the corvée (forced unpaid serf labor) and
certain taxes imposed on the peasants were "extremely bad." And he
disliked the way people were saddled with old debts sometimes passed
down from generation to generation. (Goldstein 1995, N/A) During the
half century of living in the western world, he had embraced concepts
such as human rights and religious freedom, ideas largely unknown in old
Tibet. He even proposed democracy for Tibet, featuring a written
constitution and a representative assembly.[^17]

In 1996, the Dalai Lama issued a statement that must have had an
unsettling effect on the exile community. It read in part: "Marxism is
founded on moral principles, while capitalism is concerned only with
gain and profitability." Marxism fosters "the equitable utilization of
the means of production" and cares about "the fate of the working
classes" and "the victims of ... exploitation. For those reasons the
system appeals to me, and ... I think of myself as half-Marxist,
half-Buddhist."[^23]

But he also sent a reassuring message to "those who live in abundance":
"It is a good thing to be rich... Those are the fruits for deserving
actions, the proof that they have been generous in the past." And to the
poor he offers this admonition: "There is no good reason to become
bitter and rebel against those who have property and fortune... It is
better to develop a positive attitude."[^24]

In 2005 the Dalai Lama signed a widely advertised statement along with
ten other Nobel Laureates supporting the "inalienable and fundamental
human right" of working people throughout the world to form labor unions
to protect their interests, in accordance with the United Nations'
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In many countries "this
fundamental right is poorly protected and in some it is explicitly
banned or brutally suppressed," the statement read. Burma, China,
Colombia, Bosnia, and a few other countries were singled out as among
the worst offenders. Even the United States "fails to adequately protect
workers' rights to form unions and bargain collectively. Millions of
U.S. workers lack any legal protection to form
unions..."[^25]

The Dalai Lama also gave full support to removing the ingrained
traditional obstacles that have kept Tibetan nuns from receiving an
education. Upon arriving in exile, few nuns could read or write. In
Tibet their activities had been devoted to daylong periods of prayer and
chants. But in northern India they now began reading Buddhist philosophy
and engaging in theological study and debate, activities that in old
Tibet had been open only to
monks.[^26]

In November 2005 the Dalai Lama spoke at Stanford University on "The
Heart of Nonviolence," but stopped short of a blanket condemnation of
all violence. Violent actions that are committed in order to reduce
future suffering are not to be condemned, he said, citing World War II
as an example of a worthy effort to protect democracy. What of the four
years of carnage and mass destruction in Iraq, a war condemned by most
of the world --- even by a conservative pope --- as a blatant violation
of international law and a crime against humanity? The Dalai Lama was
undecided: "The Iraq war --- it's too early to say, right or
wrong." [^27] Earlier he had voiced
support for the U.S. military intervention against Yugoslavia and, later
on, the U.S. military intervention into
Afghanistan.[^28] [^29] [^30]

## Exit Feudal Theocracy

As the Shangri-La myth would have it, in old Tibet the people lived in
contented and tranquil symbiosis with their monastic and secular lords.
Rich lamas and poor monks, wealthy landlords and impoverished serfs were
all bonded together, mutually sustained by the comforting balm of a
deeply spiritual and pacific culture.

One is reminded of the idealized image of feudal Europe presented by
latter-day conservative Catholics such as G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire
Belloc. For them, medieval Christendom was a world of contented peasants
living in the secure embrace of their Church, under the more or less
benign protection of their lords. (Gelders, p. 64) Again we are invited
to accept a particular culture in its idealized form divorced from its
murky material history. This means accepting it as presented by its
favored class, by those who profited most from it. The Shangri-La image
of Tibet bears no more resemblance to historic actuality than does the
pastoral image of medieval Europe.

Seen in all its grim realities, old Tibet confirms the view I expressed
in an earlier book, namely that culture is anything but neutral. Culture
can operate as a legitimating cover for a host of grave injustices,
benefiting a privileged portion of society at great cost to the
rest.[^31] In theocratic feudal Tibet, ruling interests
manipulated the traditional culture to fortify their own wealth and
power. The theocracy equated rebellious thought and action with satanic
influence. It propagated the general presumption of landlord superiority
and peasant unworthiness. The rich were represented as deserving their
good life, and the lowly poor as deserving their mean existence, all
codified in teachings about the karmic residue of virtue and vice
accumulated from past lives, presented as part of God's will.

Were the more affluent lamas just hypocrites who preached one thing and
secretly believed another? More likely they were genuinely attached to
those beliefs that brought such good results for them. That their
theology so perfectly supported their material privileges only
strengthened the sincerity with which it was embraced.

It might be said that we denizens of the modern secular world cannot
grasp the equations of happiness and pain, contentment and custom, that
characterize more traditionally spiritual societies. This is probably
true, and it may explain why some of us idealize such societies. But
still, a gouged eye is a gouged eye; a flogging is a flogging; and the
grinding exploitation of serfs and slaves is a brutal class injustice
whatever its cultural wrapping. There is a difference between a
spiritual bond and human bondage, even when both exist side by side.

Many ordinary Tibetans want the Dalai Lama back in their country, but it
appears that relatively few want a return to the social order he
represented. A 1999 story in the Washington Post notes that the Dalai
Lama continues to be revered in Tibet, but

> ...few Tibetans would welcome a return of the corrupt aristocratic
> clans that fled with him in 1959 and that comprise the bulk of his
> advisers. Many Tibetan farmers, for example, have no interest in
> surrendering the land they gained during China's land reform to the
> clans. Tibet's former slaves say they, too, don't want their former
> masters to return to power. "I've already lived that life once
> before," said Wangchuk, a 67-year-old former slave who was wearing his
> best clothes for his yearly pilgrimage to Shigatse, one of the holiest
> sites of Tibetan Buddhism. He said he worshipped the Dalai Lama, but
> added, "I may not be free under Chinese communism, but I am better off
> than when I was a slave."[^32]

It should be noted that the Dalai Lama is not the only highly placed
lama chosen in childhood as a reincarnation. One or another reincarnate
lama or *tulku* --- a spiritual teacher of special purity elected to be
reborn again and again --- can be found presiding over most major
monasteries. The *tulku* system is unique to Tibetan Buddhism. Scores of
Tibetan lamas claim to be reincarnate *tulkus*.

The very first *tulku* was a lama known as the Karmapa who appeared
nearly three centuries before the first Dalai Lama. The Karmapa is
leader of a Tibetan Buddhist tradition known as the Karma Kagyu. The
rise of the Gelugpa sect headed by the Dalai Lama led to a
politico-religious rivalry with the Kagyu that has lasted five hundred
years and continues to play itself out within the Tibetan exile
community today. That the Kagyu sect has grown famously, opening some
six hundred new centers around the world in the last thirty-five years,
has not helped the situation.

The search for a *tulku*, Erik Curren reminds us, has not always been
conducted in that purely spiritual mode portrayed in certain Hollywood
films. "Sometimes monastic officials wanted a child from a powerful
local noble family to give the cloister more political clout. Other
times they wanted a child from a lower-class family who would have
little leverage to influence the child's upbringing." On other occasions
"a local warlord, the Chinese emperor or even the Dalai Lama's
government in Lhasa might \[have tried\] to impose its choice of tulku
on a monastery for political reasons." (Curren, p. 3)

Such may have been the case in the selection of the 17th Karmapa, whose
monastery-in-exile is situated in Rumtek, in the Indian state of Sikkim.
In 1993 the monks of the Karma Kagyu tradition had a candidate of their
own choice. The Dalai Lama, along with several dissenting Karma Kagyu
leaders (and with the support of the Chinese government!) backed a
different boy. The Kagyu monks charged that the Dalai Lama had
overstepped his authority in attempting to select a leader for their
sect. "Neither his political role nor his position as a lama in his own
Gelugpa tradition entitled him to choose the Karmapa, who is a leader of
a different tradition..." (Curren, p. 13, p. 138) As one of the Kagyu
leaders insisted, "Dharma is about thinking for yourself. It is not
about automatically following a teacher in all things, no matter how
respected that teacher may be. More than anyone else, Buddhists should
respect other people's rights --- their human rights and their religious
freedom." (Curren, p. 21)

What followed was a dozen years of conflict in the Tibetan exile
community, punctuated by intermittent riots, intimidation, physical
attacks, blacklisting, police harassment, litigation, official
corruption, and the looting and undermining of the Karmapa's monastery
in Rumtek by supporters of the Gelugpa faction. All this has caused at
least one western devotee to wonder if the years of exile were not
hastening the moral corrosion of Tibetan
Buddhism.[^33]

What is clear is that not all Tibetan Buddhists accept the Dalai Lama as
their theological and spiritual mentor. Though he is referred to as the
"spiritual leader of Tibet," many see this title as little more than a
formality. It does not give him authority over the four religious
schools of Tibet other than his own, "just as calling the U.S. president
the 'leader of the free world' gives him no role in governing France or
Germany."[^34]

Not all Tibetan exiles are enamoured of the old Shangri-La theocracy.
Kim Lewis, who studied healing methods with a Buddhist monk in Berkeley,
California, had occasion to talk at length with more than a dozen
Tibetan women who lived in the monk's building. When she asked how they
felt about returning to their homeland, the sentiment was unanimously
negative. At first, Lewis assumed that their reluctance had to do with
the Chinese occupation, but they quickly informed her otherwise. They
said they were extremely grateful "not to have to marry 4 or 5 men, be
pregnant almost all the time," or deal with sexually transmitted
diseases contacted from a straying husband. The younger women "were
delighted to be getting an education, wanted absolutely nothing to do
with any religion, and wondered why Americans were so naïve \[about
Tibet\]."[^35]

The women interviewed by Lewis recounted stories of their grandmothers'
ordeals with monks who used them as "wisdom consorts." By sleeping with
the monks, the grandmothers were told, they gained "the means to
enlightenment" --- after all, the Buddha himself had to be with a woman
to reach enlightenment.

The women also mentioned the "rampant" sex that the supposedly spiritual
and abstemious monks practiced with each other in the Gelugpa sect. The
women who were mothers spoke bitterly about the monastery's confiscation
of their young boys in Tibet. They claimed that when a boy cried for his
mother, he would be told "Why do you cry for her, she gave you up ---
she's just a woman."

The monks who were granted political asylum in California applied for
public assistance. Lewis, herself a devotee for a time, assisted with
the paperwork. She observes that they continue to receive government
checks amounting to \$550 to \$700 per month along with Medicare. In
addition, the monks reside rent free in nicely furnished apartments.
"They pay no utilities, have free access to the Internet on computers
provided for them, along with fax machines, free cell and home phones
and cable TV."

They also receive a monthly payment from their order, along with
contributions and dues from their American followers. Some devotees
eagerly carry out chores for the monks, including grocery shopping and
cleaning their apartments and toilets. These same holy men, Lewis
remarks, "have no problem criticizing Americans for their 'obsession
with material things.'"[^36] To
welcome the end of the old feudal theocracy in Tibet is not to applaud
everything about Chinese rule in that country. This point is seldom
understood by today's Shangri-La believers in the West. The converse is
also true: To denounce the Chinese occupation does not mean we have to
romanticize the former feudal régime. Tibetans deserve to be perceived
as actual people, not perfected spiritualists or innocent political
symbols. "To idealize them," notes Ma Jian, a dissident Chinese traveler
to Tibet (now living in Britain), "is to deny them their
humanity."[^37]

One common complaint among Buddhist followers in the West is that
Tibet's religious culture is being undermined by the Chinese occupation.
To some extent this seems to be the case. Many of the monasteries are
closed, and much of the theocracy seems to have passed into history.
Whether Chinese rule has brought betterment or disaster is not the
central issue here. The question is what kind of country was old Tibet.
What I am disputing is the supposedly pristine spiritual nature of that
pre-invasion culture. *We can advocate religious freedom and
independence for a new Tibet without having to embrace the mythology
about old Tibet.* Tibetan feudalism was cloaked in Buddhism, but the two
are not to be equated. In reality, old Tibet was not a Paradise Lost. It
was a retrograde repressive theocracy of extreme privilege and poverty,
a long way from Shangri-La.

Finally, let it be said that if Tibet's future is to be positioned
somewhere within China's emerging free-market paradise, then this does
not bode well for the Tibetans. China boasts a dazzling 8 percent
economic growth rate and is emerging as one of the world's greatest
industrial powers. But with economic growth has come an ever deepening
gulf between rich and poor. Most Chinese live close to the poverty level
or well under it, while a small group of newly brooded capitalists
profit hugely in collusion with shady officials. Regional bureaucrats
milk the country dry, extorting graft from the populace and looting
local treasuries. Land grabbing in cities and countryside by avaricious
developers and corrupt officials at the expense of the populace are
almost everyday occurrences. Tens of thousands of grassroot protests and
disturbances have erupted across the country, usually to be met with
unforgiving police force. Corruption is so prevalent, reaching into so
many places, that even the normally complacent national leadership was
forced to take notice and began moving against it in late 2006.

Workers in China who try to organize labor unions in the corporate
dominated "business zones" risk losing their jobs or getting beaten and
imprisoned. Millions of business zone workers toil twelve-hour days at
subsistence wages. With the health care system now being privatized,
free or affordable medical treatment is no longer available for
millions. Men have tramped into the cities in search of work, leaving an
increasingly impoverished countryside populated by women, children, and
the elderly. The suicide rate has increased dramatically, especially
among women.[^38]

China's natural environment is sadly polluted. Most of its fabled rivers
and many lakes are dead, producing massive fish die-offs from the
billions of tons of industrial emissions and untreated human waste
dumped into them. Toxic effluents, including pesticides and herbicides,
seep into ground water or directly into irrigation canals. Cancer rates
in villages situated along waterways have skyrocketed a thousand-fold.
Hundreds of millions of urban residents breathe air rated as dangerously
unhealthy, contaminated by industrial growth and the recent addition of
millions of automobiles. An estimated 400,000 die prematurely every year
from air pollution. Government environmental agencies have no
enforcement power to stop polluters, and generally the government
ignores or denies such problems, concentrating instead on industrial
growth.[^19]

China's own scientific establishment reports that unless greenhouse
gases are curbed, the nation will face massive crop failures along with
catastrophic food and water shortages in the years ahead. In 2006-2007
severe drought was already afflicting southwest China.[^39]

If China is the great success story of speedy free market development,
and is to be the model and inspiration for Tibet's future, then old
feudal Tibet indeed may start looking a lot better than it actually was.

## References

- Mick Brown, *The Dance of 17 Lives* (Bloomsbury 2004).
- Erik D. Curren, *Buddha's Not Smiling: Uncovering Corruption at the
    Heart of Tibetan Buddhism Today* (Alaya Press 2005)
- Stuart Gelder and Roma Gelder, *The Timely Rain: Travels in New
    Tibet* (Monthly Review Press, 1964).
- Melvyn C. Goldstein, *A History of Modern Tibet 1913-1951*
    (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989).
- Melvyn C. Goldstein, *The Snow Lion and the Dragon: China, Tibet,
    and the Dalai Lama* (University of California Press, 1995).
- Felix Greene, *A Curtain of Ignorance* (Garden City, N.Y.:
    Doubleday, 1961).
- A. Tom Grunfeld, *The Making of Modern Tibet* rev. ed. (Armonk, N.Y.
    and London: 1996).
- Heinrich Harrer, *Return to Tibet* (New York: Schocken, 1985).
- Pradyumna P. Karan, *The Changing Face of Tibet: The Impact of
    Chinese Communist Ideology on the Landscape* (Lexington, Kentucky:
    University Press of Kentucky, 1976).
- Donald Lopez Jr., *Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the
    West* (Chicago and London: Chicago University Press, 1998).
- Gaby Naher, Wrestling the Dragon (Rider 2004).
- Anna Louise Strong, *Tibetan Interviews* (Peking: New World Press,
    1959).
- Lea Terhune, Karmapa of Tibet: The Politics of Reincarnation (Wisdom
    Publications, 2004)

[^1]: Mark Juergensmeyer, *Terror in the Mind of God*, (University of California Press, 2000).

[^2]: Kyong-Hwa Seok, "Korean Monk Gangs Battle for Temple Turf," *San Francisco Examiner*, 3 December 1998.

[^3]: *Los Angeles Times*, February 25, 2006.

[^4]: Lopez, p. 205.

[^5]: Curren, p. 41.

[^6]: Gelders, p. 119, 123; Goldstein 1995, pp. 6-16.

[^7]: Stephen Bachelor, "Letting Daylight into Magic: The Life and Times of Dorje Shugden," *Tricycle: The Buddhist Review*, 7, Spring 1998. Bachelor discusses the sectarian fanaticism and doctrinal clashes that ill fit the Western portrait of Buddhism as a non-dogmatic and tolerant tradition.

[^8]: Tenzin Paljor Dhoring, *A True History of the Dhoring Gazhi Family*, cited in Curren, p. 8.

[^9]: See Gary Wilson's report in *Worker's World*, 6 February 1997.

[^10]: Melvyn C. Goldstein, William Siebenschuh, and Tashì-Tsering, *The Struggle for Modern Tibet: The Autobiography of Tashì-Tsering* (Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 1997).

[^11]: Kenneth Conboy and James Morrison, *The CIA's Secret War in Tibet* (Lawrence, Kansas: University of Kansas Press, 2002)

[^12]: William Leary, "Secret Mission to Tibet," *Air & Space*, December 1997/January 1998.

[^13]: Loren Coleman, *Tom Slick and the Search for the Yeti* (London: Faber and Faber, 1989).

[^14]: Hugh Deane, "The Cold War in Tibet," *CovertAction Quarterly* (Winter 1987).

[^15]: George Ginsburg and Michael Mathos *Communist China and Tibet* (1964), quoted in Deane. Deane notes that author Bina Roy reached a similar conclusion.

[^16]: *London Times*, 4 July 1966.

[^17]: Tendzin Choegyal, "The Truth about Tibet," *Imprimis* (publication of Hillsdale College, Michigan), April 1999.

[^18]: Elaine Kurtenbach, *Associated Press* report, 12 February 1998.

[^19]: *San Francisco Chronicle*, 9 January 2007.

[^20]: Report by the International Committee of Lawyers for Tibet, *A Generation in Peril* (Berkeley Calif.: 2001)

[^21]: Jim Mann, "CIA Gave Aid to Tibetan Exiles in '60s, Files Show," *Los Angeles Times*, 15 September 1998; and New York Times, 1 October, 1998.

[^22]: Heather Cottin, "George Soros, Imperial Wizard," *CovertAction Quarterly* no. 74 (Fall 2002).

[^23]: The Dalai Lama in Marianne Dresser (ed.), *Beyond Dogma: Dialogues and Discourses* (Berkeley, Calif.: North Atlantic Books, 1996).

[^24]: These comments are from a book of the Dalai Lama's writings quoted in Nikolai Thyssen, "Oceaner af onkel Tom," *Dagbladet Information*, 29 December 2003, (translated from Danish for me by Julius Wilm). [\[web\]](https://www.information.dk/Indgang/VisArkiv.dna?pArtNo=20031229154141.txt)

[^25]: "A Global Call for Human Rights in the Workplace," *New York Times*, 6 December 2005.

[^26]: *San Francisco Chronicle*, 14 January 2007.

[^27]: *San Francisco Chronicle*, 5 November 2005.

[^28]: *Times of India*, 13 October 2000.

[^29]: Samantha Conti's report, Reuters, 17 June 1994.

[^30]: Amitabh Pal, "The Dalai Lama Interview," Progressive, January 2006.

[^31]: Michael Parenti, *The Culture Struggle* (Seven Stories, 2006).

[^32]: John Pomfret, "Tibet Caught in China's Web," *Washington Post*, 23 July 1999.

[^33]: Curren, passim. For books that are favorable toward the Karmapa appointed by the Dalai Lama's faction, see Terhune; Naher; Brown.

[^34]: Erik D. Curren, "Not So Easy to Say Who is Karmapa," correspondence, 22 August 2005. [\[web\]](https://www.buddhistchannel.tv/index.php?id=22.1577,0,0,1,0.)

[^35]: Kim Lewis, correspondence to me, 14 July 2004.

[^36]: Kim Lewis, correspondence to me, 15 July 2004.

[^37]: Ma Jian, *Stick Out Your Tongue* (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2006).

[^38]: PBS documentary, *China from the Inside*, January 2007. [\[web\]](https://www.pbs.org/kqed/chinainside/)

[^39]: "China: Global Warming to Cause Food Shortages," *People's Weekly World*, 13 January 2007.
